[DOC] Add extra description of the SASL_PLAIN authentication mechanism (#4605)
strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator: documentation/modules/oauth/con-oauth-authentication-flow.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// assembly-oauth-authentication.adoc

[id='con-oauth-authentication-flow-{context}']
= OAuth 2.0 authentication mechanisms

You can configure OAuth 2.0 authentication using one of the following authentication mechanisms:

* SASL_OAUTHBEARER
* SASL_PLAIN

Both mechanisms allow Kafka clients to establish authenticated sessions with Kafka brokers. 

> However, the authentication flow between a client, the authorization server, and the Kafka broker is different for each mechanism.

Reviewer: I think it is really important to explain the differences and recommendations. @mstruk can provide more details, but AFAIU:
* Whenever possible, OAUTHBEARER should be used
* Only when the user has clients not supporting OAUTHBEARER, they should consider using PLAIN.

Author: That would be great if @mstruk can add those guidelines.

Reviewer 2: we have a warning about using SASL plain in `KafkaClientAuthenticationPlain` schema reference

.SASL_OAUTHBEARER

Support for the SASL_OAUTHBEARER mechanism is built in to many Kafka clients.

The client initiates a session with the Kafka broker using the SASL OAUTHBEARER mechanism for credentials exchange, where credentials take the form of a JWT access token.

Kafka brokers and clients both need to be configured to use OAuth 2.0. 
SASL_OAUTHBEARER must be enabled in the listener configuration for the Kafka broker.

.SASL_PLAIN

SASL_PLAIN is a simple authentication mechanism that is supported by all Kafka client tools, including developer tools such as kafkacat.

SASL_PLAIN allows client authentication using either of the following methods:

* OAuth access token
* OAuth `clientId` and `secret` (the client credentials)

The client must enable SASL_PLAIN and set the `username` and `password`. 
If the client sets `username` to `access-token`, the authorization server will interpret the password as the access token. 
Otherwise, the authorization server will interpret the user as the `clientId` and the password as the client secret.

> Kafka brokers and clients both need to be configured to use OAuth 2.0. SASL_PLAIN must be enabled in the listener configuration for the Kafka broker.

Reviewer: I think this makes it more clear that this is just a flag in the OAuth configuration. I think we should also have some example here maybe?

```suggestion
Kafka brokers and clients both need to be configured to use OAuth 2.0. SASL_PLAIN must be enabled in the listener OAuth 2.0 authentication configuration for the Kafka broker.
```

Author: I can add a short example YAML. "Configuring OAuth 2.0 support for Kafka brokers" already has three examples.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// assembly-oauth-authentication.adoc

[id='con-oauth-authentication-flow-{context}']
= OAuth 2.0 authentication mechanisms

You can configure OAuth 2.0 authentication using one of the following authentication mechanisms:

* SASL_OAUTHBEARER
* SASL_PLAIN

Both mechanisms allow Kafka clients to establish authenticated sessions with Kafka brokers. 
However, the authentication flow between a client, the authorization server, and the Kafka broker is different for each mechanism.

.SASL_OAUTHBEARER

Support for the SASL_OAUTHBEARER mechanism is built in to many Kafka clients.

> The client initiates a session with the Kafka broker using the SASL OAUTHBEARER mechanism for credentials exchange, where credentials take the form of a JWT access token.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The client initiates a session with the Kafka broker using the SASL OAUTHBEARER mechanism for credentials exchange, where credentials take the form of a bearer token provided by the callback code. Using Strimzi OAuth callbacks one can configure three ways to provide the token:
* Client ID and Secret (by using OAuth2 client credentials mechanism)
* A long-lived access token, obtained manually by the user at configuration time
* A long-lived refresh token, obtained manually by the user at configuration time
```

Kafka brokers and clients both need to be configured to use OAuth 2.0. 

> SASL_OAUTHBEARER must be enabled in the listener configuration for the Kafka broker.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
SASL_OAUTHBEARER is automatically enabled in the listener configuration for the Kafka broker, so it is not necessary to explicitly enable it.
```

[source,yaml,subs="attributes+"]
----
  # ...
  authentication:
    type: oauth
    # ...
    enableOauthBearer: true

>     enablePlain: false

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

----

.SASL_PLAIN

SASL_PLAIN is a simple authentication mechanism that is supported by all Kafka client tools, including developer tools such as kafkacat.

> SASL_PLAIN allows client authentication using either of the following methods:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
SASL_PLAIN with the Strimzi provided callback is what we also call OAuth over PLAIN, and allows a client to authenticate using either of the following methods:
```

> * OAuth access token

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> * OAuth `clientId` and `secret` (the client credentials)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* OAuth `clientId` and `secret` (the client credentials)
* OAuth access token
```

The client must enable SASL_PLAIN and set the `username` and `password`. 

> If the client sets `username` to `access-token`, the authorization server will interpret the password as the access token. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the client prefixes the `password` with `$accessToken:` followed by the value of the access token (access token), the authorization server will interpret the password as the access token.
```

> Otherwise, the authorization server will interpret the user as the `clientId` and the password as the client secret.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Otherwise, the authorization server will interpret the `username` as the client ID and the `password` as the client secret.

If the `password` is set as the access token, the `username` has to be set to the same principal name the Kafka broker will obtain from the access token. The specifics depend on how you configure username extraction (using `userNameClaim`, `fallbackUserNameClaim`, `fallbackUsernamePrefix`, `userInfoEndpointUri`), but also on your authorization server - how it maps client Ids to account names.
```

> Kafka brokers and clients both need to be configured to use OAuth 2.0. SASL_PLAIN must be enabled in the listener OAuth 2.0 authentication configuration for the Kafka broker.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Kafka brokers and clients both need to be configured to use OAuth 2.0. SASL_PLAIN must be enabled in the listener OAuth 2.0 authentication configuration for the Kafka broker.

The following enables SASL_PLAIN in addition to SASL_OAUTHBEARER which is enabled by default. If you want only SASL_PLAIN you can disable SASL_OAUTHBEARER by setting `enableOauthBearer` to `false`.
```

[source,yaml,subs="+quotes,attributes+"]
----
  # ...
  authentication:
    type: oauth
    # ...

>     enableOauthBearer: false

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Using the callbacks, you can configure token provision in one of three ways:

* Client ID and Secret (by using the OAuth 2.0 client credentials mechanism)

* A long-lived access token, obtained manually at configuration time

* A long-lived refresh token, obtained manually at configuration time

SASL_OAUTHBEARER is automatically enabled in the `oauth` listener configuration for the Kafka broker. 
You can set the `enableOauthBearer` property to `true`, though this is not required.

[source,yaml,subs="attributes+"]
----
  # ...
  authentication:
    type: oauth
    # ...
    enableOauthBearer: true
----

.SASL_PLAIN overview

SASL_PLAIN, also referred to as _OAuth 2.0 over PLAIN_, is a simple authentication mechanism supported by all Kafka client tools (including developer tools such as kafkacat). 
Client credentials are handled centrally, behind an authorization server that complies with OAuth 2.0 and OpenID Connect (OIDC).

When used with the provided callbacks, SASL_PLAIN allows Kafka clients to authenticate with Kafka brokers using either of the following methods:

> * OAuth access token
> 
> * OAuth `clientId` and `secret` (the client credentials)

Reviewer: Should we use the same terms as in the list on lines 24-30?

```suggestion
* Client ID and Secret (by using the OAuth 2.0 client credentials mechanism)

* A long-lived access token, obtained manually at configuration time
```

The client must enable SASL_PLAIN and set the `username` and `password`. 

> If the client prefixes the `password` with `$accessToken:` followed by the value of the access token (access token ???), the authorization server will interpret the password as the access token. 

Reviewer: I guess the `(access token ???)`  should not be here?

Author: Sorry, that was my mistake.

Reviewer: No worries ... that is what reviews are for ;-)

However, the developer must often write custom callbacks that provide access tokens for authentication, as needed.
Strimzi provides these callbacks for standard Java Kafka clients (clients that use the Kafka producer and consumer APIs). 
Therefore, developers do not need to provide custom callbacks in their application code. 

With OAUTHBEARER, the client initiates a session with the Kafka broker for credentials exchange, where credentials take the form of a bearer token provided by the Strimzi OAuth callback code. 
Using the callbacks, you can configure token provision in one of three ways:

* Client ID and Secret (by using the OAuth 2.0 client credentials mechanism)

* A long-lived access token, obtained manually at configuration time

* A long-lived refresh token, obtained manually at configuration time

OAUTHBEARER is automatically enabled in the `oauth` listener configuration for the Kafka broker. 
You can set the `enableOauthBearer` property to `true`, though this is not required.

[source,yaml,subs="attributes+"]
----
  # ...
  authentication:
    type: oauth
    # ...
    enableOauthBearer: true
----

.PLAIN overview

> PLAIN, also referred to as _OAuth 2.0 over PLAIN_, is a simple authentication mechanism supported by all Kafka client tools (including developer tools such as kafkacat). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
PLAIN is a simple authentication mechanism supported by all Kafka client tools (including developer tools such as kafkacat). In order to use it together with OAuth authentication we install additional server-side callbacks and call this _OAuth 2.0 over PLAIN_.
```

Client credentials are handled centrally, behind an authorization server that complies with OAuth 2.0 and OpenID Connect (OIDC).

When used with the provided callbacks, PLAIN allows Kafka clients to authenticate with Kafka brokers using either of the following methods:

* Client ID and Secret (by using the OAuth 2.0 client credentials mechanism)

* A long-lived access token, obtained manually at configuration time

The client must enable PLAIN and set the `username` and `password`. 

> If the client prefixes the `password` with `$accessToken:` followed by the value of the access token, the authorization server will interpret the password as the access token. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the client prefixes the `password` with `$accessToken:` followed by the value of the access token, the Kafka broker will interpret the password as the access token. 
```

> Otherwise, the authorization server will interpret the `username` as the client ID and the `password` as the client secret.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Otherwise, the Kafka broker will interpret the `username` as the client ID and the `password` as the client secret.
```

However, the developer must often write custom callbacks that provide access tokens for authentication, as needed.
Strimzi provides these callbacks for standard Java Kafka clients (clients that use the Kafka producer and consumer APIs). 
Therefore, developers do not need to provide custom callbacks in their application code. 

With OAUTHBEARER, the client initiates a session with the Kafka broker for credentials exchange, where credentials take the form of a bearer token provided by the Strimzi OAuth callback code. 
Using the callbacks, you can configure token provision in one of three ways:

* Client ID and Secret (by using the OAuth 2.0 client credentials mechanism)

* A long-lived access token, obtained manually at configuration time

* A long-lived refresh token, obtained manually at configuration time

OAUTHBEARER is automatically enabled in the `oauth` listener configuration for the Kafka broker. 
You can set the `enableOauthBearer` property to `true`, though this is not required.

[source,yaml,subs="attributes+"]
----
  # ...
  authentication:
    type: oauth
    # ...
    enableOauthBearer: true
----

.PLAIN overview

> PLAIN is a simple authentication mechanism supported by all Kafka client tools (including developer tools such as kafkacat). 

Reviewer 2: We say earlier that _Support for OAUTHBEARER is built in to many clients_ and here we say PLAIN is supported by all _client tools_. Does this mean we would normally have to configure OAUTHBEARER, both or neither for clients and client tools?

Reviewer 3: I don't know about the choice of workd but let me just clarify a bit ...
Many client tools use libraries that have basic OAUTHBEARER support (they understand it at protocol level), but require the client to write and install a callback handler that provides the access token. We provide such callback handler for upstream Kafka Client java library, but not for any other Kafka client library in other languages like Go, C/C++, JS ... In that case the client would have to write their own code for connecting to authorization server and obtaining the token.
Some Kafka client libraries may not even support OAUTHBEARER at protocol level or handle it properly by providing a callback mechanism. In that case the client simply can't use OAUTHBEARER.

Author: To reduce the ambiguity, I changed "built in" and "supported" to just "used". Apparently all clients use PLAIN. I added a new sentence: "OAUTHBEARER can only be used for Kafka broker authentication by Kafka clients that support this mechanism".

> To enable PLAIN to be used together with OAuth authentication, Strimzi includes additional server-side callbacks and calls this _OAuth 2.0 over PLAIN_. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To enable PLAIN to be used together with OAuth authentication, Strimzi includes server-side callbacks and calls this _OAuth 2.0 over PLAIN_. 
```

> With PLAIN, Client credentials are handled centrally, behind an authorization server that complies with OAuth 2.0 and OpenID Connect (OIDC).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With PLAIN, client credentials are handled centrally, behind an authorization server that complies with OAuth 2.0 and OpenID Connect (OIDC).
```

Reviewer 2: Do we need to say you will need a compliant authorzation server?

> When used with the provided callbacks, PLAIN allows Kafka clients to authenticate with Kafka brokers using either of the following methods:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When used with the OAuth 2.0 over PLAIN callbacks, Kafka clients authenticate with Kafka brokers using either of the following methods:
```

> * Client ID and Secret (by using the OAuth 2.0 client credentials mechanism)

Reviewer 2: We're using lower case secret elsewhere.

* A long-lived access token, obtained manually at configuration time

> The client must enable PLAIN and set the `username` and `password`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The client must be enabled to use PLAIN authentication with a `username` and `password`. 
```

Reviewer 2: Do we provide example clients configured for PLAIN and OAUTHBEARER?

Author: @mstruk - Do we provide this?

Reviewer 3: You mean example of client configuration for using PLAIN to connect to the Kafka broker?
There's documentation for it [here](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-oauth/blob/main/README.md#configuring-the-kafka-client-with-sasl_plain). PLAIN mechanism doesn't require any additional Strimzi libraries on the client.

OAUTHBEARER on the other hand requires strimzi-kafka-oauth client libraries as explained [here](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-oauth/blob/main/README.md#configuring-the-kafka-client-with-sasl_oauthbearer)

> If the client prefixes the `password` with `$accessToken:` followed by the value of the access token, the Kafka broker will interpret the password as the access token. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the password is prefixed with `$accessToken:` followed by the value of the access token, the Kafka broker will interpret the password as the access token. 
```

Otherwise, the Kafka broker will interpret the `username` as the client ID and the `password` as the client secret.

If the `password` is set as the access token, the `username` must be set to the same principal name that the Kafka broker obtains from the access token. 

> The process depends on how you configure username extraction (using `userNameClaim`, `fallbackUserNameClaim`, `fallbackUsernamePrefix`, and `userInfoEndpointUri`), and also your authorization server (in particular, how it maps client IDs to account names).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The process depends on how you configure username extraction (using `userNameClaim`, `fallbackUserNameClaim`, `fallbackUsernamePrefix`, or `userInfoEndpointUri`), and also your authorization server (in particular, how it maps client IDs to account names).
```

Reviewer 2: This is a long sentence. Maybe it could be split and the brackets brought into main sentences.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// assembly-oauth-authentication.adoc

[id='con-oauth-authentication-flow-{context}']
= OAuth 2.0 authentication mechanisms

Strimzi supports the OAUTHBEARER and PLAIN mechanisms for OAuth 2.0 authentication. 
Both mechanisms allow Kafka clients to establish authenticated sessions with Kafka brokers. 
The authentication flow between clients, the authorization server, and Kafka brokers is different for each mechanism.

Configure clients to use OAUTHBEARER whenever possible. 
This mechanism provides a higher level of security because client credentials are _never_ shared with Kafka brokers. 
Consider using PLAIN only with Kafka clients that do not support OAUTHBEARER. 

If necessary, OAUTHBEARER and PLAIN can be enabled together, on the same `oauth` listener.

.OAUTHBEARER overview

> OAUTHBEARER is the default authentication mechanism included as part of Kafka.

Reviewer 3: If I didn't know better, I would understand this sentence as if OAUTHBEARER is the mechanism everyone uses with Kafka because all clients and server use it by default. That is of course not the case. OAUTHBEARER is supported, but has to be explicitly configured, and if you don't want to write your own callback handlers, you don't have many other options (no other option that I know of in fact) but to use the callbacks provided by Strimzi.

Author: I will update the explanation, thank you.

Using the callbacks, you can configure token provision in one of three ways:

* Client ID and Secret (by using the OAuth 2.0 client credentials mechanism)

* A long-lived access token, obtained manually at configuration time

* A long-lived refresh token, obtained manually at configuration time

OAUTHBEARER is automatically enabled in the `oauth` listener configuration for the Kafka broker. 
You can set the `enableOauthBearer` property to `true`, though this is not required.

[source,yaml,subs="attributes+"]
----
  # ...
  authentication:
    type: oauth
    # ...
    enableOauthBearer: true
----

[NOTE]
====
OAUTHBEARER authentication can only be used by Kafka clients that support the OAUTHBEARER mechanism at the protocol level.
====

.PLAIN overview

PLAIN is a simple authentication mechanism used by all Kafka client tools (including developer tools such as kafkacat). 
To enable PLAIN to be used together with OAuth 2.0 authentication, Strimzi includes server-side callbacks and calls this _OAuth 2.0 over PLAIN_. 

> With PLAIN, client credentials are handled centrally, behind a compliant authorization server.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With Strimzi implementation of PLAIN, the client credentials are not stored in Zookeeper but are handled centrally, behind a compliant authorization server, just like when OAUTHBEARER is used.
```

Author: I applied the suggestion but reworded slightly.

If the client sets `username` to `access-token`, the authorization server will interpret the password as the access token. 
Otherwise, the authorization server will interpret the user as the `clientId` and the password as the client secret.

Kafka brokers and clients both need to be configured to use OAuth 2.0. SASL_PLAIN must be enabled in the listener OAuth 2.0 authentication configuration for the Kafka broker.

[source,yaml,subs="+quotes,attributes+"]
----
  # ...
  authentication:
    type: oauth
    # ...
    enableOauthBearer: false

>     enablePlain: true

Reviewer: Will it be clear tot he users that they can also have both set to true?

Author: Probably not...

I can add something like this:

SASL_OAUTHBEARER and SASL_PLAIN can be enabled at the same time to support both types of clients.

Author: Added:

> OAUTHBEARER and PLAIN can be enabled at the same time, on the same `oauth` listener, if both types of OAuth clients need to authenticate.
